Urbit namespace  (300K)
C. Guy Yarvin, 1/21/10


4. Standardization (a rant)

We now turn to a more practical question.  How do we map
[path deck] to [file]?  What does this function actually
look like?  And how can we possibly standardize it?

It should be beyond dispute that standardization is needed.
In a non-standardized marketplace, when non-standardizable 
and standardizable products compete, one of the latter will
win and all of the former will lose.

This *standardization pressure* is of course at its most extreme
in network environments, where competitors live or die by network
effect.  Standardizable systems win because someone has to win,
and because they *can* win.  Therefore, rational actors search
for the largest bandwagon and get on it.

To create a standardizable anything, there is only one way: if
anything would be an obstacle to standardization, don't do it.
One such obstacle is as bad as a thousand.

As someone who has done a fair bit of standards work, I find the
resulting mentality quite difficult to explain to those who have
not experienced this awful experience - like Ernst Juenger trying
to explain World War 1.  

Had Juenger had been a delegate to the WAP Forum, rather than a
stormtrooper in the Imperial Army, instead of *In
Stahlgewittern* (In Storms of Steel) he could only have written
*In Crapgewittern* (In Storms of Crap).  In such storms you keep
your head down or don't last long.  Not that it is enough to
survive!  Rather, you must *master* that storm.  Or at least,
that's your job.  On the other hand, you get to go to Paris.

Urbit has a simple, drastic approach to these storms of crap.
We must produce a standards-quality result, without the dubious
assistance of a standards organization, entirely through the
open-source process.  No crap; no Paris.  Alas.

Basically, Kelvin versioning is what you use when you want to
standardize without Eurocrats.  If an open-source process is 
credible enough to get anything to 0K without being obviously
laughable, it is a credible standard - without any acronyms at
all.  0K is just a label, and it mean not mean true convergence.
It can be the result of mere exhaustion, carelessness, etc.  As
in any release, the system may be truly done, or not done at all.  
But if it is not done, the failed process is generally obvious.
Therefore, doing Kelvin versioning right should establish
credibility - the one and only requirement for standardization.

Knowing this actually saves us time.  It ensures that, for the
actual structure of the SFN, we need only consider simple and
timeless designs - because, in the market, these will always
defeat un-simple and dated designs.

This makes the problem easier.  It prunes the search space.
However, it requires thinking with a standards mentality.
Believe me, this is by no means an automatic attribute!

Urbit can be seen as a sort of Internet coup to recover the lost
throne of Jon Postel.  When Ira Magaziner wrested control of the
DNS from Jon Postel, a great battle was lost.  Old kings cannot
be revived, but their battles can always be refought.

I am no Jon Postel.  And note that Urbit is not designed as a
monarchy - it is an oligarchy, meant to be far stronger and more
resilient.  There are quite a few differences between me and Jon
Postel!  But one is that Jon Postel wasn't a royalist.

However, if we wish to walk in the footsteps of Jon Postel, we
must follow the way of Jon Postel.  This is the way of IETF.
If you don't know the way of IETF, the RFCs are over there.

